IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024 681

A Low-Cost Floating-Point
Dot-Product-Dual-Accumulate

Architecture for HPC-Enabled AI
Hongbing Tan , Libo Huang , Zhong Zheng, Hui Guo , Qianmin Yang , Li Shen,

Gang Chen , Liquan Xiao, and Nong Xiao , Senior Member, IEEE

∑
Abstract—The dot-product N

i=1 Ai ×Bi is one of the most fre- However, the versatility of data types and the tremendous
quently used operations for a wide variety of high-performance computational power of HPC and AI converged computing
computing (HPC) and artificial intelligence (AI) applications. lead to expensive costs and complexity in hardware design.
However, for large-scale algorithms, such as GEMM and FFT,
independent additions are necessary to accumulate the results As a solution, transprecision computing [4] has been exten-
of length-limited dot-product in order to form the final result, sively explored to address the growing need for improved
thus increasing latency and overhead. Hence, we proposed a performance and energy efficiency in modern computing
dot-product-dual-accumulate (DPDAC) architecture capable of

∑ systems.
performing N=1,2,4

( i=1 Ai × Bi +
∑M=1,2

j=1 Cj) on a wide range of In addition to the commonly used double-precision (DP)
formats. The proposed architecture supports both single-path and and single-precision (SP) formats in traditional HPC systems,
dual-path execution. The single path is designed for performing recent research efforts have explored various formats in mod-
DP FMA or DPDAC of lower formats, while dual-path supports
parallel operations for single-precision (SP) addition and 2-term ern systems to achieve higher energy efficiency. For example,
SP or TF32 dot-product or 4-term HP or BF16 dot-product. Intel Nervana’s Flexpoint [5], Google TPU’s 16-bit “Bfloats
Moreover, numerical precision conversion is also supported by (BF16)” [6], and NVIDIA’s 19-bit TestFloat-32 (TF32) imple-
the proposed architecture, allowing for the conversion of num- mented in specific accelerators such as Tensor Cores [7],
bers to higher or lower formats. The proposed DPDAC has been demonstrate the necessity of new architectures with extreme
demonstrated to significantly reduce the overhead in comparison
to discrete designs that utilize multiple single-mode FP units to transprecision flexibility for floating-point (FP) computation.
achieve the same functionalities. Furthermore, when compared These advancements, driven by deep learning algorithms and
to the state-of-the-art multiple-precision designs, the proposed applications, highlight the growing demand for more efficient
architecture has been shown to support a wide range of formats FP operations. Compared to high-precision formats, lower
and a greater variety of operations with lower costs. precision numbers can not only save memory resources but

Index Terms—Dot-product-dual-accumulate (DPDAC), fused also be implemented more efficiently in hardware due to
multiply-add, high-performance computing (HPC)-enabled arti- their smaller bitwidth. However, the implementation of HPC-
ficial intelligence (AI), mixed-precision, numerical precision
conversion, transprecision computing. enabled AI algorithms using complete low-precision opera-

tions may incur accuracy loss due to its narrower dynamic
range or limited precision [8], [9]. Thus, mixed-precision

I. INTRODUCTION methods are also widely explored to increase performance
while maintaining high accuracy, performing multiplications

RECENTLY, the integration of high-performance comput- in lower precision while accumulating products into higher
ing (HPC) and artificial intelligence (AI) has become precision. For example, in the field of linear algebra, SP [10]

an exciting and innovative paradigm for academia and indus- and half-precision (HP) [8] are used as the low-precision for-
try [1], [2], [3]. HPC-enabled AI workloads require sophisti- mats for the majority of computations in iterative refinement,
cated hardware support to process a wide range of data formats while DP is used at the last few stages to refine the results.
and perform trillions of calculations per second, or more. Likewise, in order to reduce the accumulated rounding error

Manuscript received 21 February 2023; revised 6 July 2023; accepted of deep learning algorithms, low-precision formats, such as
27 August 2023. Date of publication 18 September 2023; date of cur- TF32 [11], HP [9], and BF16 [12] multiplications need to be
rent version 22 January 2024. This work was supported by the Key accumulated into SP format in convolution (CONV) or general
Laboratory of Advanced Microprocessor Chips and Systems; in part by
NSFC under Grant 62272475 and Grant 62090023; and in part by NSFHN matrix multiplication (GEMM) of deep learning applications.
under Grant 2022JJ10064. This article was recommended by Associate Editor So far, transprecision FP multiply-accumulate (MAC) units
K. Olcoz. (Corresponding author: Libo Huang.) have been developed to reduce area, power consumption,

Hongbing Tan, Libo Huang, Zhong Zheng, Hui Guo, Qianmin Yang,
Li Shen, and Liquan Xiao are with the College of Computer Science and latency, and improve accuracy compared to a network of
Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, discrete FP units by executing common logic for multiple oper-
China (e-mail: libohuang@nudt.edu.cn). ations in parallel. Previous FP units in [13], [14], and [15]

Gang Chen and Nong Xiao are with the School of Data and Computer
Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China. support multiple formats and improve throughput by using

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2023.3316994 parallel operations, but have lower efficiency in performing
1937-4151 ©c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.

See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



682 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

dot-product algorithms, such as fast Fourier transform (FFT),
GEMM, and CONV. Designs in [16] and [17] proposed FP
dot-product units that sum up multiple products together to
improve performance and reduce overhead. However, when
using these dot-product units to construct the computing
systems, independent adders are required to sum up the
result generated by each unit, resulting in extra hardware
costs. Additionally, previous FP units primarily focused on

Fig. 1. Supported FP formats of the proposed DPDAC architecture.
the implementation of HPC applications, but provided limited
support for transprecision operations that are well-suited for
deep learning algorithms. Section IV details the circuit implementation of each module.

Hence, we proposed a dot-product-dual-accumulate Section V presents the methodology, synthesis results, analy-
(DPDAC) architecture capable of supporting transprecision sis, and comparison with previous works. Finally, Section VI
FP operations for both HPC and AI algorithms. The proposed concludes the article.
architecture supports both single-path and dual-path execution
by splitting the DPDAC into two parts for a broad range
of scenarios. For single-path execution, it can perform one II. BACKGROUND

DP fused multiply-accumulate (FMA) or one DPDAC of A. Numerical Format
lower formats. For dual-path execution, it supports parallel The standard FP formats are defined in IEEE754-2008 stan-
operations for SP addition and 2-term SP or TF32 dot-product dard [18] which consist of three components: 1) the 1-bit sign
or 4-term HP or BF16 dot-product. In addition to supporting (S); 2) the e-bit biased exponent (E); and 3) the m-bit man-
multiply-add operations, the DPDAC architecture can be tissa (M). The actual value of the normal number represented
modified to facilitate numerical precision conversion, thereby in IEEE 754-2008 format is
enabling the conversion of numbers to higher or lower

(−1)S × (
im + 2−n × )

M × 2E−bias
formats to accommodate the datatype transformation in (1)
the datapath of mixed-precision algorithms. The proposed

the bias is the exponent bias whose value is 2m−1 − 1, im is
DPDAC significantly reduces the overhead compared to the

the implicit bit for the mantissa. For normal numbers, im = 1.
discrete design that utilizes multiple single-mode FP units to

For zero and subnormal numbers, im = 0. In this article, the
achieve the same functionalities. Furthermore, compared to

components of the standard formats, DP, SP, and HP, defined
the state-of-the-art multiple-precision designs, the proposed

in IEEE 754-2008, and the TF32 and BF16 formats are shown
architecture supports a wide range of formats and more

in Fig. 1.
types of operations, such as DPDAC, NPCv, and dual-path
execution, with lower costs.

The major contributions of this article are summarized as B. Conventional FP FMA Architecture
follows. The basic FP FMA architecture that computes the oper-

1) We pr∑opose a DPDAC architecture capable of support- ation A × B + C is implemented as the baseline design of
ing N=1,2,4

( i=1 Ai × Bi + ∑M=1,2
j=1 Cj). The proposed the proposed DPDAC architecture. In conventional FP FMA

architecture can be configured to perform dot- architecture, all the operands are of the same precision, and
product, addition, and FMA by setting the operational the whole datapath is usually divided into three pipeline stages
modes. to improve performance. The datapath of the conventional FP

2) The proposed architecture supports both single-path and FMA architecture is described as follows.
dual-path execution for transprecision FP operations, 1) The mantissa padded with 1-bit implicit bit, ManA and
allowing for one DP FMA or one DPDAC of lower for- ManB, are multiplied by an unsigned multiplier, and then
mats to be performed in single-path execution, as well generate the carry-save format product.
as parallel operations for SP addition and 2-term SP or 2) At the same time, the exponent difference between prod-
TF32 dot-product or 4-term HP or BF16 dot-product in uct A × B and C, the sign processing, the exponent
dual-path execution. prediction, and alignment for addend C based on the

3) The proposed architecture supports NPCv in mixed- value of exponent difference are also performed in the
precision operations. Numbers can be converted to first pipeline stage.
higher or lower formats based on the practical require- 3) Then, in the second pipeline stage, the aligned addend
ment of mixed-precision algorithms with negligible C and the mantissa product are added together through
overhead. a carry save adder (CSA) and a carry propagate adder

4) The proposed DPDAC architecture supports more for- (CPA), and the normalization shifting amount is also
mats and functionalities compared to other multiformat predicted by a leading zero anticipator and counting
FP units with lower costs. (LZAC) unit at the same time.

The remainder of this article is structured as follows: 4) Finally, normalization shifting and exponent adjustment
Section II provides the background for this work. Section III are performed according to the leading zero amount; and
outlines the design of the proposed arithmetic architecture. then rounding to generate the mantissa. The FMA result

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



TAN et al.: LOW-COST FLOATING-POINT DOT-PRODUCT-DUAL-ACCUMULATE ARCHITECTURE 683

TABLE I
MAIN ABBREVIATIONS IN THIS ARTICLE

(a) (b)

Fig. 2. DPDAC in previous computing architecture. (a) DPDAC in systolic
array architecture. (b) DPDAC in adder tree architecture.

is obtained after the combination of the processed sign,
the adjusted exponent, and the rounded mantissa.

In this article, we proposed a DPDAC architecture that mod-
ifies the conventional FP FMA architecture to support a wide
range of formats and more operations. The main abbreviations
used in this article are listed in Table I. Compared to the con-
ventional FP FMA operations, the proposed architecture can
be configured to perform FMA, addition, and dot-product by
setting part of the operands to “0.” The proposed architec- Fig. 3. Mixed precision dataflow used for DNN’s training.
ture supports mixed-precision operations, where A and B are
of lower precision while C is of higher precision, as well as
dual-path execution, allowing two operations to be performed and vector computations. In matrix computation stages, dot-
in parallel. Moreover, the NPCv are also merged into the data- product is performed by adder tree, and the generated results
path of the proposed DPDAC architecture, which can convert are sent to an adder to be accumulated with the intermediate
high-precision results to lower precision formats, and by set- results from the convolution buffer (CB). As shown in Fig. 2,
ting C to “0” and B to “1” in mixed-precision operation, the both the systolic array and adder tree architectures incorporate
lower precision operand A can be converted to higher precision an adder to accumulate the results generated by MAC cells
results. The basic implementation steps of the proposed archi- with the previous intermediate results. The proposed DPDAC
tecture are similar to the conventional FP FMA architecture, architecture can be configured into various modes to meet the
however, the bitwidth of the datapath is extended to accom- requirements of these two computing architectures.
modate the higher precision addend and the pipeline stages Moreover, the DPDAC unit has the potential to be a
and the datapath need to be adjusted significantly to improve fundamental building block in general-purpose architectures
performance and realize the added functionalities for improved to efficiently perform deep learning instructions, such as
performance and efficiency. the Intel’s AVX-512 VNNI [22], Arm’s v8-SVE [23], and

v9-SME. With the support of mixed-precision dot-product, it
C. DPDAC in Processors Architecture has the capability to significantly reduce latency and enhance

the accuracy of deep learning operations.
The arithmetic units are designed and organized for con-

structing the computing architecture of processors to achieve
high performance. Two mainstream computing architectures D. NPCv in Mixed-Precision Datapath
have been applied in previous processors that the systolic Mixed-precision computation is extensively employed in
array architecture in [6] and [19] and the adder tree archi- DNN’s training [9], [12] and iteratively refining matrix equa-
tecture in [20] and [21]. A typical 2-D systolic array used in tion solvers [8], [24] for enhanced performance and overhead
TPU [6] is shown in Fig. 2(a). For the dataflow of the systolic reduction. The dataflow of mixed-precision training of DNNs,
array, each MAC cell receives data from the up and left cells where the data type undergoes transformation in different
(i.e., A and B) and the intermediate results (i.e., C) generated layers, is illustrated in Fig. 3. The core computations of for-
by the up cell. Before writing to the accumulator buffer, the ward (FWD)/backward (BWD) propagation or weight gradient
results generated by the MAC cells of the bottom row must be (WG) are represented as GEMM operations, which accept
added to the intermediate results from the accumulator buffer. inputs as low-precision tensors and accumulate the output to
Fig. 2(b) shows an adder tree architecture proposed by [21], SP tensors. In the FWD/BWD propagation, the low-precision
in which the weights and activations from the W-Buffer and activations or error gradients together with the converted
A-buffer are sent to the calculation pipelines to perform matrix weight are sent to the GEMM, and then the NPCv converts the

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



684 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

GEMM output tensors to low-precision formats before passing improved by accumulating the parallel multiplication prod-
them to the next layer. ucts in one operation. Additionally, the rounding errors are

The proposed DPDAC architecture offers three key benefits also minimized due to the fewer rounding times.
by adding the circuits for NPCv.

1) Compared to designing a standard NPCv cell, minor B. Tradeoff Between Area and Performance in Multiplier
modifications to the output processing and rounding Design
in the proposed architecture can achieve the same

The proposed design supports DP, SP, TF32, HP, and BF16
functionality.

formats in one architecture, constructed using high-precision-
2) The proposed architecture eliminates the need for storing

split methods. The design of the multiplier features a quadratic
high-precision GEMM results in memory and subse-

growth in silicon area with respect to the number of mantissa
quent retrieval for conversion in an NPCv cell. This

bits. For example, a 16-bit HP multiplier using 11 mantissa
approach effectively reduces two memory accesses,

bits requires 112 = 121 units of area, while a 32-bit SP
thereby enhancing the efficiency of mixed-precision

multiplier considering 24 mantissa bits employs 242 = 576.
algorithms.

To reduce overhead, iteration methods are applied in the
3) Storing the converted lower precision number in memory

multiplier design, at the cost of performance. Based on the
can effectively reduce the memory footprint by half.

highest format supported by the proposed design, the number
of iterations (Niter) is utilized to make a tradeoff between area

III. DPDAC ARCHITECTURE and performance for the multiplier array. Thus, the number of
A. Functions of the DPDAC Architecture units (Nunit) required for constructing the multiplier array is

inversely proportional to N
The proposed DPDAC architecture supports a broad range iter

⌈ ⌉
of FP formats to meet the practical requirements of HPC Nunit = W2

DP/Niter (2)
and AI algorithms. Specifically, DP and SP formats are uti-
lized for HPC applications, while SP, TF32, HP, and BF16 where WDP denote the mantissa bits of the DP format. The
are suitable for deep learning scenarios. In addition to the number of parallel operations NP for each format is limited by
standard and mixed-precision FMA operations similar to the two factors: 1) the number of units Nunit and 2) the bitwidth
pioneering designs of [25], [26], and [27], the proposed design of the input operands. This can be expressed as follows:
also includes the newly added DPDAC and NPCv, as well as ( (⌊ ⌋ ⌊ ⌋) ⌈ ⌉)
dual-path execution. The operations supported by the proposed 64 N W2

NP = max min unit
, , 1/ P (3)

design can be summarized. BWP W2
P Nunit

1) Based on the practical requirements of HPC algorithms,
the proposed design supports both DP and SP operations where BWP and WP are the bitwidth and mantissa bits of the

with the same precision. To improve performance while aimed formats, respectively. The constant 64 is the bitwidth

maintaining high accuracy for deep learning algorithms, of the input operands. Various formats are used in transpre-

mixed-precision operations are utilized, wherein lower cision computing to achieve high efficiency in practical HPC

precision products, such as TF32, HP, or BF16 formats, and AI converged algorithms. The parallel operations of for-

are accumulate∑d to SP format. mats, NP, is thus related to the performance of the practical

2) The DPDAC N=1,2,4
( i=1 Ai×Bi+∑M=1,2

j=1 Cj) is proposed workloads. Assuming that RP is the ratio of computation of

and can be configured to perform both single-path and the whole algorithms of the dedicated format, the runtime T

dual-path operations. One DP FMA or one DPDAC of can be calculated as follows:
⎛ ⎞

lower formats can be performed in single-path execution, ∑
while parallel operations for SP addition and 2-term SP T = ⎝ RP⎠. (4)
or TF32 dot-product or 4-term HP or BF16 dot-product P∈ N

(DP,SP,TF32,HP,BF16 P
)

are supported in dual-path execution. Based on the runtime, we obtained the unified performance
3) The NPCv operations facilitate the conversion of num- Pu as follows:

bers to higher or lower precision formats in mixed-
precision algorithms. The low-to-high conversion is Pu = 1/T. (5)
implemented in accordance with the dataflow of the
proposed architecture, while high-to-low conversion is By using iterative methods, the area of the multiplier can be
achieved by setting the value of operands in mixed- reduced by a factor of the number of iterations. This, in turn,
precision operations. reduces the area of the entire design in proportion to the area

In the proposed design, the supported DPDAC can be of the multiplier. The ratio of the multiplier area in the whole
leveraged to significantly improve the throughput and reduce design is denoted as Rmul, then we calculate the area (A) in a
rounding errors for practical HPC-enabled AI workloads. scaled format as follows:
For instance, the FFT butterfly architecture [28] requires a A = Rmul/Niter + (1 − Rmul). (6)
2-term dot-product, and more terms of products need to be
accumulated in CONV and GEMM. Compared to the serial By increasing the iteration times, we can reduce the area of
computations in FMA units, the throughput is significantly the proposed design at the cost of performance. We define

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



TAN et al.: LOW-COST FLOATING-POINT DOT-PRODUCT-DUAL-ACCUMULATE ARCHITECTURE 685

(a) (b)

Fig. 4. Performance/Area under different iteration times in HPC and AI
field. (a) DP and SP operations in HPC filed. (b) SP and HP operations in AI
filed.

an index, PA, to evaluate the methods based on the ratio of
performance and area

PA = Pu
. (7)

A
In the proposed design, the iteration times are determined

by the highest precision format, i.e., DP format, which con-
strains the throughput for SP, TF32, HP, and BF16 operations.
To evaluate the iteration times, we select typical scenarios
using DP and SP operations in the HPC field and SP and
HP operations in the AI field. We analyze the iteration times
with performance/area by adjusting the ratio of these two for-
mats and plot the results in Fig. 4. We set the Rmul to 0.7, Fig. 5. Datapath of the proposed arithmetic architecture.

which is approximately the ratio of the multiplier area in the
conventional FP FMA unit. As illustrated in Fig. 4, we deter-
mined that two iteration times is the optimal choice for various through a 4-to-2 CSA and adders. The calculation for the com-
scenarios. plement of the addition result and the prediction for the leading

zero numbers by using LZAC are also performed in parallel.

C. Dataflow of the DPDAC Architecture At the last pipeline stage, the logic for normalization, expo-
nent adjustment, rounding, NPCv, and output result processing

The proposed DPDAC architecture utilizes segmentation are contained.
hardware vectorization methods to optimize performance, such The proposed DPDAC utilizes low-power techniques, such
as throughput and latency, while minimizing area and power as gating the clock in the second pipeline stage for DP
consumption. The logic is divided into four parts based on operations to reduce energy costs, resulting in a latency of
the bitwidth of input operands to meet the demands of par- three clock cycles compared to four clock cycles for other
allel computing. To manage the segmentation of hardware, operations. Additionally, the multiplier array can be gated in
three control modes (PD_Mode, PD2_Mode, PD4_Mode) are low-precision multiplications. Furthermore, if input operands
employed, which are determined by the number of parallel are invalid, the values of the pipeline registers are retained,
products. thus avoiding the toggle of Flip-Flops and reducing power

The diagram of the proposed DPDAC architecture, illustrat- consumption.
ing the details of the proposed DPDAC datapath, is shown in The design is controlled by a 3-bit signal, Prec, support-
Fig. 5. The whole datapath consists of four pipeline stages, ing five formats (DP, SP, HP, TF32, and BF16). A 4-bit
each corresponding to a different stage of the extended func- signal, Valid, enables the splitting of 64-bit operands into
tionalities. In the first stage, processing for the input data is four 16-bit sections, while a 1-bit signal, Cvt, enables the
implemented, wherein the components of the operands are NPCv. Furthermore, the Para signal regulates single-path and
checked, extracted, and rearranged. The multiple-precision dual-path execution.
multiplier, the logic for processing the sign and exponent, and
the alignment shifter with its corresponding shifting control
logic are also included. The second pipeline stage contains the D. Steps of the DPDAC Implementation
logic for adding the products generated by the parallel multi- The details of the implementation of the simplified DPDAC
plication operations in the first pipeline stage. The adder and are presented in Algorithm 1, which comprises nine steps
the alignment shifter are used to align the products, and then corresponding to the datapath of the proposed architecture.
generate the carry-save format products. The third pipeline In addition to the function logic, a clock counter (Cnt) is
stage merges the product of A×B and the aligned C operands designed to calculate the cycles and control the data selection

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 6. Vector data formats for input vectors. White blocks represent unused bits (set to “0”).

(a) (b) (c)

Fig. 7. Construct of the proposed multiple-precision multiplier array. (a) Organization of the multiplier array. (b) Dataflow of the multiple-precision multiplier
array. (c) Active multiplier in different modes.

of the multiplier array. As illustrated in Algorithm 1, steps 1 used for PD4_mode, segment 1 used for both PD4_mode and
to 5 are modified significantly to support DPDAC, while steps PD2_mode, and segment 3 applicable for all modes. To reduce
6 to 8 are similar to a conventional FP FMA implementation. power consumption, these unified vector formats are enabled
Steps 1 to 3 are executed in parallel in pipeline stage 1 to by a 4-bit signal Valid. If one bit in Valid is zero, the corre-
reduce latency, and the alignment shifting in step 4 is placed sponding segment maintains its previous value to avoid invalid
in pipeline stage 1 and pipeline stage 2 for product shifting and toggle of flip-flops.
addend shifting, respectively. The dual-path addition in step 5
is located in pipeline stage 3 to support parallel operations B. Floating-Point Multiple-Precision Multiplier Array
for dot-product and addition by reusing the adder. In steps 6 The proposed multiplier array performs the multiplication of
to 8, there are minor modifications in bitwidth and datapath the unified mantissa vectors, enabling multiple-precision mul-
compared to a conventional FP FMA implementation. Step tiplication for the supported modes. To reduce the hardware
9 merges the NPCv and, using a conventional method, obtains cost of the proposed DPDAC architecture, iteration meth-
the exponent before subtracting the base value of the expo- ods are employed to tradeoff performance and area of the
nent difference between the higher and lower formats. Finally, proposed multiplier array. Consequently, DP multiplication
the processed sign, exponent, and mantissa are combined to is implemented every other cycle utilizing recursive meth-
generate the final result. ods, while other lower precision multiplications are executed

in a pipelined fashion. As illustrated in Fig. 7, the man-
IV. CIRCUIT IMPLEMENTATION OF THE tissa of the operands A and B have been organized into

PROPOSED DPDAC ARCHITECTURE 56-bit unified vectors and split into four segments to meet

A. Input Operands Processing the parallel requirements of the supported modes. The man-
tissa multiplication for different modes can be represented

To support multiple-precision operations in the proposed as follows:
DPDAC architecture, the 64-bit input operands are decoded
into three unified vector formats that gather the sign, exponent, PDmode : {a1, a0} × {b1, b0} + {{a3, a2} × {b3, b2}} << 56
and mantissa components for each supported vector element + {{a1, a0} × {b3, b2} + {a3, a2} × {b1, b0}} << 28
format. As illustrated in Fig. 6, each operand of the DPDAC PD2mode : {{a3, a2} × {b3, b2}, {a1, a0} × {b1, b0}}
corresponds to a 92-bit vector format, comprising a 4-bit

PD4mode : {a3 × b3, a2 × b2, a1 × b1, a0 × b0} (8)
sign vector, a 32-bit exponent vector, and a 56-bit mantissa
vector. In the adopted formats, bits that are unnecessary to where the ai and bi refer to one 14-bit segment in the unified
represent vector element values are set to “0.” Each vector vectors. Based on (8), a 14×14 multiplier is used as the basic
consists of four segments, with segment 0 and segment 2 only component to construct the whole multiplier array. To reduce

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



TAN et al.: LOW-COST FLOATING-POINT DOT-PRODUCT-DUAL-ACCUMULATE ARCHITECTURE 687

Algorithm 1: Multiple-Precision DPDAC Algorithm organized into an array to perform {ai+1, ai}×{bi+1, bi} corre-
Input: A, B, C (64-bit); Prec(3-bit); Cvt, Para(1-bit); sponding to a 28-bit multiplication. Due to the zero padding in

∑
Output: D = N=1,2,4

( i=1 Ai × Bi +∑M=1,2
j=1 Cj) the unified vector of mantissa, the product contains variable

1 Initial: Cnt[31:0] = 32’b0 // Cycle Counter number of zeros in different modes, as shown in the white
2 Repeat: Step 1 ∼ Step 9, Cnt = Cnt + 1 region of the products. Fig. 7(b) illustrates the dataflow of the
3 Step 1: Input Data Processing begin whole multiplier array. Due to the use of iteration methods, DP
4 (DP, SP, TF32, HP, BF16) = Decode(Prec[2:0]) multiplication is performed every clock cycle with a latency
5 (Sign[3:0], Exp[34:0], Man[52:0]) =

Data_Extract(Input_Operands) of two cycles, while other lower precision multiplications are
6 end implemented in a pipelined manner. A turning signal Cnt[0]
7 Step 2: Mantissa Multiplication begin extracted from the clock counter is used to control the data
8 if Prec == DP then selection of the input vectors and the results. Only when Cnt[0]
9 ManB[52:0] >> 27 if Cnt[0] = 1’b1 is “1,” the final result is generated in performing DP mul-

10 PdDP0[79:0] = ManA[52:0] × ManB[26:0]
11 PdDP[107:0] + = PdDP0 << 27 if Cnt[0] = 1’b1 tiplication. Fig. 7(c) shows the position of the basic 14-bit
12 else multiplication to implement the whole 56-bit multiplication.
13 PdSP0[53:0] = ManA[26:0] × ManB[26:0] As the proposed multiplier consists of eight basic components,
14 PdSP1[51:0] = ManA[52:27] × ManB[52:27] the 16 multiplications are performed in a recursive way over
15 end two consecutive clock cycles. The gray block indicates the
16 {Pd3[25:0], Pd2[27:0], Pd1[27:0], Pd0[27:0]} =

{PdSP1[51:0], PdSP0[53:0]} corresponding multiplication is performed in cycle 0, while
17 end the operations in blue block are implemented in cycle 1. The
18 Step 3: Alignment Shifter Count begin results of these two cycles need to be added to generate the
19 ExpABMax = Maximum(AB3, AB2, AB1, AB0) whole result of DP multiplication.
20 ExpCMax = Maximum(C1, C0)
21 ASCPdi = In the design of the multiplier array, the low-power technol-

ExpABi - ExpABMax (i = 0 ∼ 3)
22 ASC_TCj = ExpABMax - ExpCj - (2 × ExpAB ogy is employed to reduce energy consumption. For example,

base -
ExpCbase) + (ManC + 3) (j = 0, 1) Multiplier 1 and Multiplier 2 can be gated in low-precision

23 ASCCj = ((ASCC1 and ASCC0) > 0 and (Para == 0))? multiplications to reduce power consumption, as shown in
ASC_TCj : (ExpCmax- ExpCj) (j = 0, 1) Fig. 7(a).

24 end
25 Step 4: Alignment Shifting begin
26 ShtRPdi = Pdi >> ASCPdi // Stage 2 C. Alignment Shifter
27 ShtRC1 = (Zeropad , ManC[162:81]) >> ASCC1 In both pipeline stage 1 and pipeline stage 2, alignment
28 Datapad = DP ? ManC[162:81]: Zero shifters are required to align the addends and the products,
29 ShtRC0 = (Datapad , ManC[80:0]) >> ASCC0 respectively. The alignment shifting method applied in the
30 ShtRC = {ShtRC1 , ShtRC0 } // for DP FMA
31 end proposed design is similar to our previous work [26]. In
32 Step 5: Dual-Path Addition begin pipeline stage 1, the alignment shifter works in parallel with
33 (SumPd , CarryPd) = CSA4-2(ShtRPdi , i = 0 ∼ 3) the mantissa multiplier to reduce the latency. As in a conven-
34 (ASum, ACarry) = CSA4-2(SumPd , CarryPd , ShtRC1 , tional design, the mantissa of C is initially placed 2 bit to the

ShtRC0) // for DPDAC left of the carry save format product, and the maximum align-
35 Addh = ShtRC[162:108] + 1’b1 // for DP FMA
36 Addl1 = ASum[107:54] + ACarry[107:54] ment amount is reached when the MSB of C is placed 2 bit
37 {A0Sum, A0Carry} = Selection({A0 to the right of the LSB of the product. However, a C-bit carry

Sum,
A0Carry},{ShtRC1 , ShtRC0 }) may be generated in dot-product operations, so the mantissa

38 Addl0 = A0Sum[53:0] + A0Carry[53:0] //Reused of C is placed (2+C) bit to the left of the carry save format
39 Addrslt = Complement({Addh, Addl1, Addl0}) product in the proposed design, as shown in Fig. 8.
40 end The bitwidth of mantissa C and mantissa A/B is Mq-bit and
41 Step 6 ∼ 8: LZAC, Normalization, Rounding
42 Step 9: Exponent Processing begin Mp-bit, respectively. In normal FMA operations, all operands
43 Exp1 = Exp- (ExpCbase - ExpABbase) //NPCv are in the same precision, Mq = Mp, while the precision of
44 Exp0 = ExpCmax - LZC //For Dual-Path addend C is higher than that of the multiplier operands A/B
45 end in mixed-precision operation, where Mq > 2 × Mp. The shift-
46 RsltPrec = {Sign, Exp[Wexp–1:0], Man[Wman-1:0]} ing operation is controlled by the ASC, whose value can be

calculated as follows:

ASC = d − const = (Ec − Eb − Ec + 2p0 − p1) − const. (9)
hardware cost, a radix-4 modified Booth multiplier [29] is
employed to implement the 14×14 multiplication. The 14-bit In (9), the const is introduced based on the initial position
multiplier operand is padded with 1-bit zero after the LSB and offset between ManC and ManA × ManB. To accommodate
2-bit zero before the MSB, then the resulting 17-bit vector is the shifting requirements of all supported formats, a 163-bit
divided into eight 3-bit encode groups to generate eight partial alignment shifter is designed in the proposed design.
products. These eight partial products are merged by two lev- In the proposed alignment shifter, the mantissa of addend
els of 4-to-2 CSA and a CPA, then generating the product PPi C is rearranged into a unified format to enable resource shar-
for ai × bi. As shown in Fig. 7(a), every four multipliers are ing among all modes, as shown in Fig. 9. The mantissa of

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



688 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 10. Calculation of the ASCs for the alignment of the products.
(d)

Fig. 8. Alignment for the addends of the proposed DPDAC architecture.
(a) Alignment of products in DPAC. (b) Alignment of C operand in DPDAC.
(c) Alignment of C operand in standard FMA operation. (d) Alignment of C
operands in dual-path execution.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 9. Unified format of the input vectors of the alignment shifter. (a) Unified
addend format of the alignment shifter. (b) Unified product format of the
alignment shifter.

each format is extended with zeros to fill the required shifting Fig. 11. Datapath of the adder and LZAC.

bitwidth. The unified vectors are right aligned, so that the bit
shifted out of the shifter can be used to generate the partial
sticky bit. For the alignment of addends, an 8-level alignment to control the shifting for the four products. In 2-term oper-

shifter is needed to meet the shifting requirement of DP opera- ations, only Pd0 and Pd3 need to be added and the ASC2 is

tion. The shifting operations are controlled by ASC calculated used to implement the shifting of the two products.

by the exponent difference module and the control mode signal The bitwidth of the alignment shifter is Mq + 3, so a 27 or

Ctrl_M. If the corresponding bit of ASCs is one, right shifting 56 bit alignment shifter is required for the SP or DP addition,

is performed, otherwise the input is selected as the aligned respectively. In the proposed design, four 27-bit alignment

result directly. The ASC vector is divided into two parts cor- shifters are designed in pipeline stage 2, but only three align-

responding to the control of the shifting of two addends C ment shifters work at any given time due to the maximum
0

and C1. In level 0–level 6, two smaller alignment shifters run product always staying in the initial position. However, com-

independently and generate two aligned results for PD2_mode pared to using three alignment shifters, our method can save

and PD4_mode. Then, the generated two aligned results are a significant number of multiplexers which are used to select

combined, and one 163-bit shifter cell is placed which is con- the shifting number and ASCs for alignment shifters.

trolled by the ASC3 for PD_mode in the last level. Moreover,
the shifted out bits in the right of the shifter cell are used to D. Datapath of Addition and Leading Zero Anticipation
generate the sticky bit, which will be added in the adder. The alignment of addend C has been performed, and the

In 2-term or 4-term DPDAC, two or four products are gen- generated 163-bit vectors need to be added with the products
erated by the multiplier array in pipeline stage 1, respectively. of mantissa multiplication A×B. The datapath of the addition
The smaller products are aligned based on the exponent dif- and LZAC are shown in Fig. 11. In pipeline stage 2, the gen-
ference of products in pipeline stage 2. As shown in Fig. 10, erated products are added by a 4-to-2 CSA and a 3-to-2 CSA.
the exponent difference of products (Pd0–Pd3) are calculated In 4-term DPDAC, only the 4-to-2 CSA works to sum up these
and four ASCs (ASC0–ASC3) are generated by using four sub- four products, while these two CSAs are combined together
tractors. The sign (S0, S1, and S2) of subtractors is used to to perform the addition of the 2-term DPDAC. The carry and
select the ASCs for products. In 4-term operations, four prod- sum generated by pipeline stage 1 and stage 2 are selected
ucts need to be added together, and ASC0–ASC3 are applied by the signal DP, which is used to enable DPmode. Then,

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



TAN et al.: LOW-COST FLOATING-POINT DOT-PRODUCT-DUAL-ACCUMULATE ARCHITECTURE 689

the selected carry and sum are added together with these two
aligned addends C0 and C1 by a 4-to-2 CSA. We employed a
163-bit adder to implement the addition of the 163-bit input
vector. In PD_mode, the addition is split into two parts in
pursuit of lower cost. For the most significant 55 bit, an incre-
menter is applied since only one of the two vectors contains
useful data. For the less significant 108 bit, the input vectors
need to be added using a CPA. The generated result of the
incrementer and the initial input vector at the higher 55 bit are
selected by the carry of the lower 108-bit CPA, and combined
with the CPA result to generate the addition results. Due to the
163-bit aligned addend being split into two narrower vectors
in PD2_mode and PD4_mode modes, only the lower 108-bit
CPA is used and the incrementer is gated to save energy con-
sumption. The sign of the result of the DPDAC architecture is Fig. 12. Exponent processing with the support of NPCv.
determined by the addition result. Specifically, if the addition
result is negative, the sign of addend C is selected and the is generated after addition, 1-bit left shifting is performed for
complement is performed for the addition result. Otherwise, mantissa and the exponent should be adjusted to add one.
the sign of product A × B is selected and the addition result
is outputted directly.

In order to reduce the latency of the proposed DPDAC dat- F. Output Processing
apath, the leading zero anticipation is implemented in parallel The sign, exponent, and mantissa are processed in the
with the addition. As both positive results and negative results preceding pipeline stages, respectively, and they need to be
can be generated by addition, both leading zeros and leading combined again to generate the final results. However, in order
ones need to be anticipated. In this article, the general case to deal with the subnormal number and NPCv, some extra
indicator presented in [30] is used. The LZAC generates a operations are required to process the exponent and mantissa.
7-bit signal LZC_amount to perform normalization, but 1-bit For the processing of mantissa, the mantissa is right aligned
error may occur and the modification is needed in the later to the LSB position after rounding, we only need to remove the
steps. implicit bit conventionally. For the processing of the exponent,

the predicted value of the exponent is calculated in pipeline
stage 1. However, the normalization, the rounding carry, and

E. Normalization and Rounding the NPCv are not considered, so the predicted exponent needs
The normalization shifter is applied to remove the leading to be adjusted accordingly.

zeros of addition, the architecture of the proposed normal- The exponent processing is performed in parallel with the
ization shifter is similar to the alignment shifter, albeit more normalization and rounding to reduce latency, and the data-
simple. Compared to an alignment shifter, the normalization path is shown in Fig. 12. The shifting amount generated by
shifting is a left shifting, and the left shifted out bits can LZAC and the fixed zero numbers determined by the leading
be discarded directly. In the normalization shifter, one more one region need to be considered to obtain the real leading
final level shifting is added for correcting the error gener- zero numbers. In PD_mode, the whole 163-bit adder is used,
ated by the LZAC. If the leading bit is detected and when so the leading one locates in the LSB 108 bit, generating 53
it is not one after shifting, 1-bit more left shifting is per- fixed zeros. In PD2_mode and PD4_mode, no fixed zeros are
formed. After shifting, the normalization results are generated generated due to only the LSB 108 bit of adder being used.
and then need to be rounded to generate the mantissa. In Moreover, the processing for NPCv is also implemented. Since
the proposed design, roundTiesToEven, the default rounding the base value of exponent in the supported precisions may
mode in IEEE 754-2008, is implemented for the supported differ, the difference between the aimed format and addition
operations. format needs to be calculated. The fixed leading zero numbers

Moreover, the NPCv is supported in the proposed design, the and the difference of the exponent base value are combined
high-precision results need to be converted to lower precision by using a multiplexer. Then, the shifting amount, the pre-
numbers before outputted to meet the datatype transform dicted exponent, and the combined output generated by the
requirement of mixed-precision algorithms. Specifically, the multiplexer are added by using a 3-to-2 CSA and an adder.
conversion operations, DP > SP, SP > TF32, SP > BF16, SP Since the shifting amount prediction error lza_error detected
> HP, are required, which are controlled by the input signal by normalization and the rounding carry round_cin generated
Cvt. The rounding position is fixed, which is the LSB position after rounding arrive later, the processing for them is per-
of the aimed precision. Therefore, the bits required to perform formed after addition to avoid a critical path. lza_error = 1
rounding, the LSB, the rounding bit, and the sticky bit, can means 1-bit more left shifting is performed, so the exponent
be generated easily. needs to subtract one, and the round_cin = 1 means the carry

The carry of rounding needs to be added to the LSB position is generated and adding one is necessary. After NPCv, the
of the aimed formats to generate the final mantissa. If the carry M-bit wider exponent of the high-precision result has been

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



690 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE II TABLE III
DELAY, AREA, AND POWER COMPARISON WITH CONV-DP UNIT FUNCTIONALITIES AND OVERHEAD COMPARISON

WITH SINGLE-MODE FP FMA UNITS

processed into an N-bit narrower exponent, and overflow may to the CONV-DP implementation, it supports a broad range of
occur in the processing. In the proposed design, saturation formats and a greater variety of operations, such as DPDAC,
overflow processing is applied in exponent adjustment. If the NPCv, and dual-path execution.
(M − N)-bit of MSB in the exponent is not zeros, the expo-
nent is set to the maximum value that the aimed precision can C. Comparisons With Single-Mode Discrete Designs
represent, otherwise the N-bit of LSB is truncated directly. The proposed DPDAC architecture supports multiple for-

Finally, the exponent vector and mantissa vector are ORed mats and various operations for HPC and AI algorithms,
together and the sign bit is added into the MSB position to providing a more efficient solution than discrete designs that
form the final FP result. utilize multiple single-mode FP units to achieve the same func-

tionalities. To compare, single-mode FMA units for DP, SP,
V. EVALUATION TF32, and HP formats were designed and synthesized under

the same constraints of the proposed design. The architec-
A. Methodology ture of these single-mode units is simpler due to the support

The model of the proposed DPDAC architecture is imple- of fewer functions or narrower bitwidth of operands, result-
mented using a structural-level Verilog HDL code. To verify ing in a smaller area than the proposed one, as shown in
the functionalities, extensive testing vectors are generated with Table III. These single-mode FP units can perform one mul-
the help of TestFloat [31], and a customized software model is tiplication and one addition per clock cycle, whereas the
also designed using C language to verify the TF32 and BF16 proposed architecture can support 2–9 operations (OPs) for
operations. Moreover, we trained the DNN model ResNet- specific formats. Therefore, multiple single-mode FP units are
50 [32] in Caffe2 by using GPU V100, and then extracted the required to realize the same functionalities. Table III indicates
intermediate values of some CONV layers. The extracted data that the combination of these discrete designs consumes 155%
can not only be used as the test vectors to verify the correctness more area than the proposed one while being able to realize
but also to evaluate the power consumption for the proposed the same functionalities.
arithmetic unit. The verification of the proposed design is
implemented using SystemVerilog, which can ensure the cor- D. Comparisons With Previous Multiple-Precision Works
rectness and provide real-time comparisons for each pipeline

Table IV presents a comparison of the functionality and
stage. For comparison purposes, we also designed single-mode

performance of the proposed DPDAC with previous works.
FP FMA units employing conventional architecture for the

The proposed DPDAC not only supports DP and SP formats
supported formats.

for HPC workloads, but also provides support for reducing
formats, such as TF32, BF16, and HP, which are suitable

B. Synthesis Results and Analysis for DNN workloads. Furthermore, the DPDAC architecture
All designs are synthesized using the 28-nm CMOS tech- enables various types of operations, including standard FMA,

nology at the TT process corner, to measure the performance dot-product, addition, and dual-path execution. Additionally,
and area, the dynamic power is measured by using the real test the incorporation of the NPCv operation in the DPDAC
vectors with the help of Static Timing Analysis (STA) tools. architecture facilitates the conversion of data formats in mixed-
The proposed DPDAC unit and conventional DP (CONV-DP) precision algorithms.
FMA unit are synthesized under the worst case delay, 0.68 As shown in Table IV, multiple-precision has been
and 0.60 ns, respectively, their area and power are shown exploited in previous works. The dual-mode designs presented
in Table II. Compared to the CONV-DP unit, the proposed in [13], [14], and [15] support one DP FMA and two par-
design only consumes 6.5% more area and 5.0% more power. allel SP FMA per clock cycle, which are commonly uti-
The increased overhead is primarily attributed to the pipeline lized in traditional HPC systems. However, the utilization
stage 2, which includes the logic for shifting and adding prod- of DP and SP operations can incur a significant compu-
ucts, as well as the dual-path for enabling parallel execution of tational overhead when executing deep learning workloads.
DPDAC and addition. Pipeline stage 1 consumes less overhead In addition to supporting standard FMA operations for DP
than the CONV-DP due to the iterative methods employed formats, the designs in [25] and [33] support 2-term dot-
in the design of the multiplier array. Despite the increased product-accumulate (DPAC) for lower formats. The differ-
resource requirements of the proposed design in comparison ence is that the 2-term DPAC in [25] is implemented using

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



TAN et al.: LOW-COST FLOATING-POINT DOT-PRODUCT-DUAL-ACCUMULATE ARCHITECTURE 691

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF FUNCTIONALITY WITH PREVIOUS MULTIPLE-PRECISION FMA DESIGNS

mixed-precision methods, while all operands are of the same The design in [35] proposed a multiformat FP architecture
precision in [33]. The 2-term DPAC is useful in perform- supporting both scalar and vector operations for each format.
ing digital signal processing applications such as FFTs. Our Compared to other multiple-precision designs, it achieves bet-
proposed 4-term DPDAC can be viewed as an extension of ter energy efficiency scaling thanks to the parallel datapaths
the 2-term DPAC, but the need to efficiently sum four terms approach. However, in most HPC and deep learning algo-
is significantly more difficult than the 2-term case. FPMax [34] rithms, the vector operations in [35] may incur performance
features separate implementations of the FMA operation for loss in performing dot-product operations, such as GEMM,
DP and SP without any datapath sharing, targeting high-speed FFT, and CONV.
ASICs. It is efficient in performing FMA operations for spe- These previous works are synthesized under different semi-
cific formats, but not suitable for HPC and AI algorithms with conductor technologies. Although the previous work [36]
versatility in data formats. In addition to DP and SP formats, proposed scaling equations for comparing designs across fabri-
the designs in [16] and [25] support HP format to efficiently cation technologies, but it lacks consideration of the difference
accelerate deep learning workloads. The work [16] design an of cell library provided by various semiconductor manufac-
FP dot-product unit for HPC and AI converged computing. It turers. Moreover, the signal activity of the test vectors of
fully exploits the hardware utilization of the multiplier array, these works is also different in power measurement, mak-
then significantly improves the performance of SP and HP ing it challenging to make a fair comparison between the
operations. However, it requires a higher bandwidth to pro- overhead of the proposed design and that of previous works.
vide data for the input operands. The proposed one achieves However, the architectures in [13], [14], [25], [33], and [34]
higher Byte/OP than the design in [16] due to the support of are also designed by modifying a CONV-DP FMA (baseline
additions. Moreover, when using the dot-product unit proposed design, Base). Hence, a relative comparison that computes
by [16] to construct a computing system, independent adders the increased overhead on the basis of a CONV-DP FMA
are required to sum up the result generated by the dot- is suitable for these designs, as shown in Table V. The
product unit, which will significantly increase hardware cost. designs in [34] optimized to minimize the latency use a

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



692 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE V
OVERHEAD COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED [2] T. Kurth et al., “Exascale deep learning for climate analytics,” in

DESIGN WITH PREVIOUS WORKS Proc. Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput., Netw., Storage Anal., 2018,
pp. 649–660.

[3] S. Wang, J. Cao, and P. S. Yu, “Deep learning for spatio-temporal
data mining: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 8,
pp. 3681–3700, Aug. 2022.

[4] A. C. I. Malossi et al., “The transprecision computing paradigm:
Concept, design, and applications,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Europe
Conf. Exhibition (DATE), Mar. 2018, pp. 1105–1110.

[5] U. Köster et al., “Flexpoint: An adaptive numerical format for efficient
training of deep neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–14.

[6] N. P. Jouppi et al., “In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor pro-
cessing unit,” in Proc. 44th Annu. Int. Symp. Comput. Archit., 2017,
pp. 1–12.

[7] S. Xie et al., “Extreme datacenter specialization for planet-scale com-
cascade multiply-add with a Wallace tree to sum up the par- puting: ASIC clouds,” ACM SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev., vol. 52, no. 1,
tial products. So it has a shorter latency than the baseline pp. 96–108, 2018.

[8] A. Haidar, S. Tomov, J. Dongarra, and N. J. Higham, “Harnessing
design, but more area and power are needed. The designs GPU tensor cores for fast FP16 arithmetic to speed up mixed-precision
in [13], [14], [25], and [33] modify the architecture of a iterative refinement solvers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput.,
CONV-DP FMA to support multiple-precision operations by Netw., Storage Anal., 2018, pp. 603–613.

[9] P. Micikevicius et al., “Mixed precision training,” 2017,
sharing the circuit, but they significantly increase the over- arXiv:1710.03740.
head. Compared to prior works, the proposed design supports [10] J. Langou, J. Langou, P. Luszczek, J. Kurzak, A. Buttari, and
a wider range of reducing formats (e.g., TF32 and BF16), J. Dongarra, “Exploiting the performance of 32 bit floating point arith-

which are efficient for deep learning tasks and enable addi- metic in obtaining 64 bit accuracy (revisiting iterative refinement for
linear systems),” in Proc. 2006 ACM/IEEE Conf. Supercomput., 2006,

tional comprehensive operations, such as DPDAC, NPCv, and p. 50.
dual-path execution. Moreover, due to iterative techniques, the [11] A. Poulos, S. A. McKee, and J. C. Calhoun, “Posits and the state
proposed design exhibits lower relative overhead compared to of numerical representations in the age of exascale and edge comput-

ing,” Softw. Pract. Exp., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 619–635, 2022.
a typical DP FMA implementation. [12] D. Kalamkar et al., “A study of BFLOAT16 for deep learning train-

ing,” 2019, arXiv:1905.12322.
VI. CONCLUSION [13] L. Huang, L. Shen, K. Dai, and Z. Wang, “A new architecture for

multiple-precision floating-point multiply-add fused unit design,” in
In this article, we proposed a DPDAC architecture that can Proc. 18th IEEE Symp. Comput. Arithmetic (ARITH), 2007, pp. 69–76.

efficiently handle a variety of FP operations, enabling trans- [14] K. Manolopoulos, D. Reisis, and V. A. Chouliaras, “An efficient multiple
precision computing for HPC and AI workloads. The proposed precision floating-point multiply-add fused unit,” Microelectron. J.,

vol. 49, pp. 10–18, Mar. 2016.
architecture can be configured to perform various operations, [15] V. Arunachalam, A. N. J. Raj, N. Hampannavar, and C. Bidul,
such as FMA, addition, dot-product, and so on, by setting the “Efficient dual-precision floating-point fused-multiply-add architec-
value of operands. The proposed architecture supports both ture,” Microprocess. Microsyst., vol. 57, pp. 23–31, Mar. 2018.

single-path and dual-path execution. In single-path execution, [16] W. Mao et al., “A configurable floating-point multiple-precision process-
ing element for HPC and AI converged computing,” IEEE Trans. Very

it can perform one standard DP FMA; or 2-term DPDAC for Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 213–226, Feb. 2022.
SP and TF32 formats; or 4-term DPDAC for HP and BF16 for- [17] J. Sohn and E. E. Swartzlander, “A fused floating-point four-term dot
mats. In dual-path execution, the DPDAC operations are split product unit,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 63, no. 3,

pp. 370–378, Mar. 2016.
into two parts that the dot-product and addition, which can [18] Z. Dan et al., IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic, IEEE
be performed in parallel. In addition to supporting multiply- Standard 754-2008, 2008.
add operations, the DPDAC architecture can be modified to [19] H. Liao, J. Tu, J. Xia, and X. Zhou, “DaVinci: A scalable architecture for

facilitate numerical precision conversion, thereby enabling the neural network computing,” in Proc. Hot Chips Symp., 2019, pp. 1–44.
[20] T. Chen et al., “DianNao: A small-footprint high-throughput accelera-

convenient conversion of numbers to higher or lower formats tor for ubiquitous machine-learning,” ACM SIGARCH Comput. Archit.
to accommodate the datatype transformation in the datapath News, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 269–284, 2014.

of mixed-precision algorithms. The proposed DPDAC signif- [21] Y. Jiao, L. Han, and X. Long, “Hanguang 800 NPU—The ultimate AI
inference solution for data centers,” in Proc. IEEE Hot Chips 32 Symp.

icantly reduces the overhead compared to the discrete design (HCS), 2020, pp. 1–29.
that utilizes multiple single-mode FP units to achieve the same [22] M. Arafa et al., “Cascade lake: Next generation Intel Xeon scalable
functionalities. Furthermore, compared to the state-of-the-art processor,” IEEE Micro, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 29–36, Mar./Apr. 2019.

multiple-precision designs, the proposed architecture supports [23] N. Stephens et al., “The ARM scalable vector extension,” IEEE Micro,
vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 26–39, Mar./Apr. 2017.

a wide range of formats and more types of operations, such [24] M. Baboulin et al., “Accelerating scientific computations with mixed
as DPAC and NPCv, with lower costs. The support of a broad precision algorithms,” Comput. Phys. Commun., vol. 180, no. 12,

range of formats and more types of operations makes the pp. 2526–2533, 2009.
[25] H. Zhang, D. Chen, and S.-B. Ko, “Efficient multiple-precision floating-

proposed DPDAC architecture suitable for accelerating both point fused multiply-add with mixed-precision support,” IEEE Trans.
HPC and AI applications. Comput., vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 1035–1048, Jul. 2019.

[26] L. Huang, S. Ma, L. Shen, Z. Wang, and N. Xiao, “Low-cost binary128
REFERENCES floating-point FMA unit design with SIMD support,” IEEE Trans.

Comput., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 745–751, May 2012.
[1] G. Yi and V. Loia, “High-performance computing systems and appli- [27] N. Brunie, F. De Dinechin, and B. De Dinechin, “A mixed-precision

cations for AI,” J. Supercomput., vol. 75, no. 8, pp. 4248–4251, fused multiply and add,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 45th Asilomar Conf.
2019. Signals, Syst. Comput. (ASILOMAR), 2011, pp. 165–169.

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



TAN et al.: LOW-COST FLOATING-POINT DOT-PRODUCT-DUAL-ACCUMULATE ARCHITECTURE 693

[28] A. Kaivani and S. Ko, “Floating-point butterfly architecture based on Qianmin Yang received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
binary signed-digit representation,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. degrees in computer science and technology from
(VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1208–1211, Mar. 2016. the National University of Defense Technology

[29] A. D. Booth, “A signed binary multiplication technique,” Quart. J. Mech. (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2006, 2008, and
Appl. Math., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 236–240, 1951. 2012, respectively.

[30] M. S. Schmookler and K. J. Nowka, “Leading zero anticipation and He is currently an Assistant Professor with
detection-a comparison of methods,” in Proc. 15th IEEE Symp. Comput. the Computer College, NUDT. His main research
Arithmetic, 2001, pp. 7–12. interests include computer architecture, high-

[31] J. Hauser. “Berkeley TestFloat.” Jan. 2018. [Online]. Available: http:// performance computing, and reconfigurable
www.jhauser.us/arithmetic/TestFloat.html computing.

[32] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
pp. 770–778.

[33] M. Goek and M. M. Oezbilen, “Multi-functional floating-point MAF
designs with dot product support,” Microelectron. J., vol. 39, no. 1, Li Shen received the Ph.D. degree from the
pp. 30–43, 2008. National University of Defense Technology

[34] J. Pu, S. Galal, X. Yang, O. Shacham, and M. Horowitz, “FPMax: (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2003.
A 106GFLOPS/W at 217GFLOPS/mm2 single-precision FPU, and a He is currently a Professor with the School of
43.7 GFLOPS/W at 74.6 GFLOPS/mm2 double-precision FPU, in 28nm Computer Science, NUDT. He has published 40
UTBB FDSOI,” 2016, arXiv:1606.07852. research papers, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS

[35] S. Mach et al., “FPnew: An open-source multiformat floating-point unit ON COMPUTERS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
architecture for energy-proportional transprecision computing,” IEEE PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, Micro,
Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 774–787, HPCA, and DAC. His main research interests are
Apr. 2021. image super resolution, machine learning, and

[36] A. Stillmaker and B. Baas, “Scaling equations for the accurate prediction performance optimization of machine learning
of CMOS device performance from 180nm to 7nm,” Integration, vol. 58, systems.
pp. 74–81, Jun. 2017.

Hongbing Tan received the B.S. degree from Harbin Gang Chen received the B.E. degree in biomedi-
Engineering University, Harbin, China, in 2015, and cal engineering, the B.S. degree in mathematics and
the M.S. degree from the National University of applied mathematics, and the M.S. degree in con-
Defense Technology, Changsha, China, in 2017, trol science and engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong
where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in University, Xi’an, China, in 2008, 2008, and 2011,
computer science and technology. respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer sci-

His research interests include computer architec- ence from the Technical University of Munich,
ture, and hardware design for deep learning. Munich, Germany, in 2016.

He is currently a Professor with Sun Yat-
sen University, Guangzhou, China. His research
interests include deep learning, computer vision,

high-performance computing, and embedded system.
Prof. Chen received the Best Paper Awards on DATE 2021, ICESS 2022,

Libo Huang received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees ICET 2021, ESTImedia 2014, and the Best Paper Award Candidate on
in computer science from the National University of CODES+ISSS 2020, FPL 2022. He is an Associate Editor of the Journal
Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in of Circuits, Systems, and Computers.
2005 and 2010, respectively.

He was a Professor with NUDT. He has authored
over 100 papers in internationally recognized jour-
nals and conferences. His current research interests Liquan Xiao received the M.S. and Ph.D.
include computer architecture, computer arithmetic, degrees in computer science and technology from
agile hardware design, and big data system. the National University of Defense Technology

(NUDT), Changsha, China, in 1994 and 1997,
respectively.

He is currently a Professor with NUDT.
Zhong Zheng born in 1986. He received the His research interests include architecture
Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology of high-performance computing, high-speed
from the National University of Defense Technology interconnect network, system integration, and power
(NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2014. management.

He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
College of Computer, NUDT. His main research
interests include processor micro-architecture and
high-performance computing.

Nong Xiao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology
from the National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha, China, in 1996.

Hui Guo received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in In 2004, he was a Professor with the Department
computer science and technology from the National of Computer Science. He is currently a Professor
University of Defense Technology (NUDT), with the School of Data and Computer Science, Sun
Changsha, China, in 2013 and 2018, respectively. Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. He has con-

He is currently an Assistant Professor with the tributed four invited chapters to book volumes and
College of Computer, NUDT. His research interest published more than 100 papers in archival jour-
includes computer architecture, heterogeneous nals and refereed conference proceedings. He has
computing, and SIMD architecture. developed many grid computing products, e.g. the monitor system of China

Grid. His research interests include computer architecture, embedded system,
grid computing, and large-scale storage.

Prof. Xiao became a member of ACM in 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: International Institute of Information Technology Bangalore. Downloaded on January 27,2026 at 12:38:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.